GWEN IFILL: Good evening.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
Judy Woodruff is away.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: The
European Union orders Apple to
pay over $14
billion in back taxes to
Ireland, after uncovering
what it calls a sweetheart deal
between the
company and Dublin.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Tuesday:
a look at the ground game this
presidential
election -- how the candidates
are bring their
campaigns to key states and
voters.
GWEN IFILL: And Iceland
struggles with a tourism
boom.
As curious crowds flock to the
country's breathtaking
landscapes, residents are
increasingly overwhelmed.
HALLDOR MAR, Resident of
Iceland: I'm about
to get booted out of my home
because of Airbnb.
I'm looking at maybe we have to
just move
abroad, and this is going to be
a tourist
country.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: This was primary day
in some states,
with two big-name Republican
senators working
to hold onto their seats.
In Arizona, John McCain
campaigned for a sixth
term one day after turning 80.
And in Florida, Marco Rubio
sought nomination
for a second term, after
dropping his presidential
bid.
Also in Florida: Democratic
Congresswoman
Debbie Wasserman Schultz faced
Bernie Sanders
backer Tim Canova.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Good weather
sent thousands
more African migrants sailing
for Sicily today.
Dan Rivers of Independent
Television News
reports at least 11,000 people
have been rescued
since Sunday.
DAN RIVERS: They have risked
everything to
get this far, and now their
desperation overwhelms
them.
Some plunge into the water to
swim the last
few yards to safety.
Many must have feared they would
never make
it.
This vessel was carrying more
than 500 migrants,
mostly from the Horn of Africa,
who had been
packed into this small boat
found drifting
13 miles off the coast of Libya.
The first off were dozens of
children who
might not fully appreciate the
change they
were in.
It was thanks to a Spanish aid
agency that
they were plucked to safety.
WOMAN: They were really
desperate.
For us, it was really hard,
because what we
saw is basically many, many,
many children,
many babies and a lot of women,
which is kind
of exceptional, because, in
general, there
are more men traveling than
women and children.
For them especially, this
crossing is really,
really difficult.
DAN RIVERS: It shows how
desperate they are
when 5-day-old twins are found
aboard, born
into a migration, barely a week
old and already
homeless.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
International Organization
for Migration reports more than
100,000 people
have reached Italy by boat this
year.
More than 2,700 have died in the
attempt.
GWEN IFILL: In Italy, grieving
survivors of
last week's earthquake paid
final respects
to loved ones today.
Hundreds gathered at a
state-sponsored funeral
in Amatrice, where at least 231
people were
killed.
Firefighters and
first-responders stood along
caskets under makeshift tents as
family members
looked on.
Later, a mass was held, and
mourners released
white balloons.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
Islamic State
group's leading figures has been
killed in
Northern Syria.
The militants say Abu Muhammad
al-Adnani died
today in Aleppo province.
A U.S. defense official says he
was targeted
in an airstrike.
He's the ISIS leader who
declared a modern-day
caliphate across Syria and Iraq
two years
ago.
GWEN IFILL: At least 10,000
people may have
died so far in Yemen's civil
war.
That estimate today from the
U.N. Humanitarian
Office is nearly double any
previous figure.
The fighting in Yemen has now
lasted 18 months.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In economic
news: France
joined Germany today in dousing
hopes for
a free trade deal between the
U.S. and the
European Union.
A top German official said
Sunday that negotiations
have failed.
Today, French President Francois
Hollande
added his skepticism in a speech
in Paris.
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE, French
President (through
translator): The negotiations
are bogged down.
Positions have not been
respected.
It's clearly unbalanced.
So, rather than prolonging
talks, it is better
to make sure that we can advise
all parties
that France will not be able to
agree on an
accord which has been prepared
that way.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The potential
agreement
has run into growing opposition
in both the
U.S. and Europe.
And Britain's vote to leave the
E.U. has further
damaged prospects for a deal.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, President
Obama commuted the sentences of
another 111
federal prison inmates.
That makes more than 670 during
his time in
office.
They'd been convicted of
nonviolent drug crimes.
The president has argued that
sentences in
such cases are too long, and
he's called for
congressional action to lessen
the penalties.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And on Wall
Street, stocks
gave back some of Monday's
gains.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 48 points
to close at 18454.
The Nasdaq fell nine points, and
the S&P 500
slipped four.
GWEN IFILL: Still to come on the
"NewsHour":
tech giant Apple is ordered to
pay more than
$14 billion in back taxes to
Ireland; mass
graves are uncovered as ISIS
loses ground;
teaching teachers about the
communities they
serve; and much more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The European
Commission
ruled today that Ireland must
collect $14.5
billion in back taxes from
Apple.
The announcement fueled new
tensions between
the U.S. and Europe over the
role of multinational
corporations, how they are
taxed, and whether
it should be considered a
subsidy.
The antitrust regulator for the
E.U. said
Ireland had given Apple a
sweetheart tax deal
for well over a decade, with
special laws
that effectively allowed Apple
to pay less
than 1 percent corporate tax.
The E.U. accused Apple of
setting up two companies
in Ireland with a head office
that only exists
on paper.
The profits from European stores
all go to
the Ireland head office and are
essentially
untaxed.
Apple said it would appeal the
decision and
denied the characterization.
In a statement, the company's
chief executive,
Tim Cook, said the European
commission is
trying to -- quote -- "rewrite
Apple's history
in Europe, ignore Ireland's tax
laws and upend
the international tax system in
the process."
The company has more than $200
billion in
cash.
I spoke with Commissioner
Margrethe Vestager,
who announced the decision.
Mr. Vestager, thanks for joining
us.
First off, what gave Apple an
edge in Ireland
that was unfair in the eyes of
the E.U.?
MARGRETHE VESTAGER, European
Commission: Well,
we have a long longstanding
prohibition of
state aid, which means benefits,
advantages
to a selected company.
And that may come in any form,
as a piece
of land, a favorable loan, a
grant or a tax
benefit.
And, of course, any member state
can have
their own tax legislation.
We would never question that.
But the thing is that you cannot
give a specific
company a benefit or an
advantage which is
not open to other companies.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is there
evidence that this
was specific to Apple and not to
all the other
companies that are doing
business in Ireland?
MARGRETHE VESTAGER: Yes, it is.
This arrangement is due to two
things which
are none of our concern, how
Apple is organized
and the Irish tax legislation.
But the thing that is specific
is two tax
rulings -- are two tax rulings
that are directed
specifically to Apple.
And tax rulings are, by nature,
specific because
they are directed from the
government or from
the authorities to a specific
company.
And this is only for them.
It is not for other companies.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of Apple's
concerns
today, in a call with reporters,
the CFO said
the .005 percent effective tax
rate that you
cited this morning during your
press conference,
they said that -- "I said it
before.
It's a completely made-up
number.
We paid $400 million of taxes in
Ireland during
2014.
We're one of the largest
taxpayers in the
country."
MARGRETHE VESTAGER: Well, the
thing is that
it is important for profits to
be paid where
profits are made.
And what we have seen is that
the Irish tax
rulings allowed Apple to put the
huge majority
of their profits into a
so-called headquarter
or head office.
This head office only existed on
paper.
It had no employees, no
premises, no real
activities, and it wasn't taxed,
not in Ireland,
nor anywhere else.
And that, of course, then led to
the result
that Apple paid very, very, very
little in
taxes compared to their profits,
in some years,
as little as 0.005 percent.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is this part
of a broader
effort to redefine how
multinational corporations
pay taxes?
We have heard that you're also
going after
McDonald's and reportedly
Amazon?
MARGRETHE VESTAGER: Well, the
thing is that
I do state aid control, and
state aid control
do not redefine taxation as
such.
That, of course, takes the
legislature to
work.
And that is why we have worked
with the European
Council, with the European
Parliament in order
to change legislation, to make
transparency
greater, to have
country-by-country reporting,
for tax authorities actually to
know what
other tax authorities are doing.
But it is for the legislature to
change that.
What I do is what we have a
longstanding tradition
of doing and a longstanding
court practice
of doing, which is to control
state aid seen
as specific advantages to
specific companies.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Doesn't this
draw into conflict
the role of the European Union
or the Commission
vs. countries and their
sovereignty and how
they're able to lay out their
tax laws?
MARGRETHE VESTAGER: Well, the
sovereignty
of the member state is protected
by our treaty.
And I, of course, respect that
100 percent.
I have sworn to respect the
treaty.
But the thing is that two things
have to be
in place at the same time, both
upholding
national legislation as tax
legislation and,
at the same time, the European
legislation
that we have made in common,
that -- the E.U.
state aid rules.
And here we have a situation
where you have
Irish states -- Irish tax
legislation, but
a breach of European state aid
rules, because
illegal state aid was handed
out.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For the
record, we did invite
Apple.
They didn't have anybody
available today.
But they did say in a statement
that this
could have a profound and
harmful effect on
investment and job creation in
Europe.
They employ about 6,000 people
in Ireland.
Do you expect that?
MARGRETHE VESTAGER: Well, the
thing is that
Europe is a wonderful place to
do business.
It's a single market with more
than 500 million
potential customers.
It's a place where you find
research and development
of highest quality.
You find very skilled people,
good people
to employ, wonderful
infrastructure.
So you're more than welcome to
come to Europe
to do business.
And I think you can have a very
good business
here.
The thing is that what we don't
like so much
is if you come to Europe for tax
avoidance.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is there a
concern that
this is -- the uncertainty
between how the
E.U. rules on different laws
inside member
nations could create a climate
where a company
might not come to Europe; they
might base
themselves somewhere else?
MARGRETHE VESTAGER: I think
there is an issue
here also of corporate culture,
because, if
you're in a country where the
tax rate is
12.5 percent, as in Ireland, and
you pay less
than 1 percent, also
substantially less than
1 percent, well, then I think
you should also
reconsider if everything is all
right.
And 12.5 percent is, in the
first place, a
very low corporate taxation
compared to other
European member states.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Margrethe
Vestager, thanks
so much for joining us.
MARGRETHE VESTAGER: It was a
pleasure.
Thank you for having me.
GWEN IFILL: Cataloging the
atrocities committed
by the so-called Islamic State
group in Syria
and Iraq is a difficult,
sometimes impossible
task.
A new report from the Associated
Press attempts
to document the mass graves
holding some of
the group's victims.
The AP found 72 mass grave sites
around Syria
and Iraq.
One of the sites held as many as
1,700 bodies.
For more, we are joined by
Associated Press
reporter Lori Hinnant, one of
the authors
of the investigation.
Lori, thank you for joining us.
Seventy-two mass grave sites,
how were you
and your colleagues able to find
them and
document them?
LORI HINNANT, Associated Press:
Well, we used
a variety of sources.
We first went to Iraqi
Kurdistan, where there
are at least 35 mass graves on
Sinjar Mountain
alone, most of them holding the
bodies of
minority Yazidi.
We also talked to the Kurdish
regional government,
who told us of at least two
others, one outside
Mosul at a prison, where 600 to
800 inmates
were killed, and another in a
deep natural
geological pit.
Then we asked the government in
Baghdad what
they knew to try and triangulate
some of the
other information.
We also went into archives of
news reports
when sites were discovered.
For Syria, we can't go in.
So, we had to speak to
activists, locals,
some fighters who are fighting
against Islamic
State, and people who are trying
to document
human rights abuses.
GWEN IFILL: Do mass graves also
-- always
mean mass killings?
That is to say, did all of the
people -- or
the bodies that you found in
these graves
all come from single episodes,
single assaults?
LORI HINNANT: Not necessarily,
although, largely,
they did.
And even for some of them, it's
not clear
who is even in them.
The graves have not been
excavated and they
are untouched.
Others are in territory that no
one has seen.
The pit outside Mosul and
another one in Syria,
for example, we know from
Islamic State's
own propaganda that they have
buried hundreds,
if not more, bodies in them.
And they just tossed them in
really without
a thought.
We have no idea why the people
were killed
exactly or when.
So, in those cases, yes, the
victims are killed
at different times.
In Sinjar, they were all killed
at the same
time.
GWEN IFILL: Do we know how they
were killed?
Are we talking about gunshots?
Are we talking about sometimes
in some cases
illness?
LORI HINNANT: Illness seems
unlikely.
It's mostly gunshots.
The assault on Sinjar, for
example, it was
some gunshots.
Some people were beheaded.
A few were run over by cars.
And the site that holds the
bodies of about
1,700 Iraqi soldiers, they were
all gunned
down after being forced to lie
down on the
ground.
Same with the Shiite prisoners
of the prison
in Mosul.
GWEN IFILL: You said that, in
Syria, it was
difficult to physically get to
the actual
grave sites.
Then how were you able to
document what happened?
LORI HINNANT: Well, what we did
was, we relied
on multiple sources.
So, we didn't just wait for one
person to
say, we think there is a mass
grave here.
We tried to find a variety of
sources, including
locals.
Some people sent us photos,
which we could
help by geolocating and by
coordinating with
what Islamic State's own
propaganda says.
They have made no effort to hide
what they're
doing.
GWEN IFILL: Can the bodies that
are then retrieved,
or are they being retrieved, can
they be identified?
LORI HINNANT: Well, that's the
complicated
part right now, that they
largely aren't being
retrieved, for a variety of
reasons, a want
of money, want of political
will, and very,
very unstable areas.
Sinjar Mountain, although it's
been largely
taken back from Islamic State,
still remains
a part of it inside a no-man's
land within
reach of mortars.
Some of the sites are believed
to be booby-trapped
and are too unsafe to go in to.
The bodies in some cases have
been identified.
Relatives can find personal
belongings.
They can sometimes even find
I.D.s.
And there is a center in the
city of Dohuk
where they are keeping some of
these belongings,
in hope of finding other
survivors who might
be able to say who they were.
GWEN IFILL: Has anyone ever been
charged or
jailed or in any way punished
for these deaths?
LORI HINNANT: There has been
justice done
in one case, quite recently
actually, in the
death at Camp Speicher of the
1,700 Iraqi
soldiers.
Just on August 21, 36 men were
hanged who
had been convicted in those
killings.
GWEN IFILL: As part of this
investigation,
Lori, and you talked to people
who were survivors
or witnesses.
Were you able to talk to any of
the relatives
of people who think that their
loved ones
might be in one of these graves?
LORI HINNANT: We did.
At one point, we went to an area
just outside
the town of Hardan, Iraq, and we
met a man
there who originally was just
there to tell
us about the graves.
He was one of the leaders of the
village,
and he wanted to tell us about
the graves
and how much they wished that
they would be
excavated and that the people
who were buried
in there would get a proper
burial.
And it took some time before he
finally acknowledged
that, in fact, two of his adult
sons were
among the victims of that
killing.
And after a little while, he and
I talked
for a bit longer, and he invited
another young
man down from the hillside town
just above
where the killings had taken
place, and said
he actually saw the killings.
Turned out that the young man
whose name was
Arkon (ph) had never spoken with
the father
about what happened the day his
two sons were
-- died.
It was really chilling.
As we were standing there, the
two men discussed
the events of this horrific day
that they
feel as though they're reliving
every single
day that they pass the grave.
GWEN IFILL: Will this father
ever be able
to retrieve the bodies of his
sons?
LORI HINNANT: He hopes to.
He sounded very resigned to it.
He said he wanted the
international community
to understand that they couldn't
keep reliving
the sorrow all of the time.
All he wanted was a proper place
for his sons
to be laid to rest.
GWEN IFILL: Lori Hinnant of the
Associated
Press, thank you very much.
LORI HINNANT: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
gap in the
presidential candidates' ground
game; and
why Icelanders want tourists to
stop coming
to their island nation.
But, first: Urban school
districts are tough
places to be a teacher, but also
where the
best and the brightest are
needed the most.
In Chicago, which is dealing
with one of the
worst budget crises in years,
recruiting and
holding on to good teachers is
an uphill battle.
The district also faces a common
dilemma.
Even as the student body is
growing more diverse,
the teaching profession is not.
One university teacher training
program is
trying to step up to the
challenge.
Lisa Stark of Education Week has
the story.
LISA STARK: It's summer in the
city of Chicago,
the nation's third largest
public school district.
And these aspiring teachers are
getting to
know each other, the first step
in an intensive
summer fellowship to prepare
them to teach
in urban schools.
WOMAN: I want to be a teacher in
Chicago Public
Schools.
WOMAN: Because I think I can
make a really
big difference.
MAN: And make sure other
students who come
from backgrounds like myself get
these opportunities.
LISA STARK: These fellows, 21 of
them, are
all students at Illinois State
University,
training to be teachers.
They have high hopes, but most,
like Morgan
Brauer, have little or no
experience in the
inner city.
We first met Morgan the day
before, at her
home about an hour away.
Tell me about this neighborhood,
how you grew
up?
MORGAN BRAUER, Student, Illinois
State University:
So, I'm from the suburbs of
Chicago, Rolling
Meadows specifically.
LISA STARK: Morgan typifies
America's teaching
force, mostly white, mostly
female.
MORGAN BRAUER: I grew up, it's
everyone basically
goes to college.
There is not really like any
question.
Like, I was going to college.
That was that.
And I think that's kind of why I
want to teach
in Chicago Public Schools, is
because they
don't have the same
opportunities that I did
growing up in the suburbs.
So, it's just going to be a new
experience.
LISA STARK: This morning, Morgan
is leaving
for this unique teaching
fellowship that takes
her out of Rolling Meadows for a
new home
in Auburn Gresham, a
predominantly African-American
community on Chicago's South
Side, one of
four neighborhoods fellows are
placed in for
one month, all with high-poverty
schools,
many with high crime rates as
well.
It's a nonstop four weeks,
assisting in the
classroom in the morning,
volunteering in
the afternoon.
Classes and seminars fill
evenings and weekends,
all to help them appreciate and
understand
the culture of these
communities.
ROBERT LEE, STEP-UP, Illinois
State University:
And they hope that, when this is
all finished,
that you come back and become a
teacher for
their community.
LISA STARK: Robert Lee runs this
fellowship,
called STEP-UP.
ROBERT LEE: This infusion, this
allowing candidates
to experience firsthand and
start to confront
their -- their own race, their
own class,
their own sources of privilege,
leads to a
much stronger teacher when they
enter the
field.
LISA STARK: Only 7 years old,
with 144 participants
so far, it's a small program,
but one that
takes enormous effort, including
finding funding,
about $8,000 a fellow.
ROBERT LEE: That's where the
challenge is
going to be.
LISA STARK: Virtually every
teacher college
requires so-called cultural
competency training,
but Professor Carol Lee says
many programs
come up short.
CAROL LEE, Northeastern
University: The notion
of cultural competence is often
pitched as
something special you need to
know if you're
working with colored kids.
And I'm saying, I don't care
where you're
teaching.
The cultural competence means
that I have
to go into that community with
the humility
in order to learn.
LISA STARK: One of the key ways
that STEP-UP
fellows learn is from the host
families.
Yolanda Smith will provide
Morgan meals and
a place to sleep, but, most
importantly, lessons
that can't be taught in the
classroom.
What do you hope Morgan leaves
this neighborhood
with?
YOLANDA SMITH, Host Mom: Just to
learn about
us, and don't believe the hype.
LISA STARK: What is the hype, in
your view?
YOLANDA SMITH: That we're
shiftless and violent.
And I just want us -- want her
to see the
human side of us, not what is
portrayed on
the media.
WOMAN: We're so thankful that
you're watching
over her while she's here.
YOLANDA SMITH: I sure do, me and
God.
WOMAN: Yes.
Yes.
LISA STARK: Not all of the
fellows are from
the suburbs.
Asia-Ana Williams grew up in
Chicago.
ASIA-ANA WILLIAMS, Student,
Illinois State
University: I'm, like, a little
nervous.
This is going to be my first
time teaching,
so I don't know how I will do.
And that's, like, scary to think
about.
LISA STARK: Asia-ana was
recruited by Illinois
State while in high school as
part of an effort
to encourage students of color
to become teachers.
ASIA-ANA WILLIAMS: I want to
come home to
students who look just like me,
who have been
through things just like I have,
and help
them the way my teachers helped
me.
LISA STARK: She too is in an
unfamiliar neighborhood,
the largely Hispanic community
of Little Village.
It didn't take her long to feel
at home.
MAN: This is really good, so try
it.
WILLIAMS: My host family can't
get rid of
me now.
Like, I love them too much.
Yes, they're pretty much stuck
with me.
LISA STARK: The Velazco family
has taken in
fellows since the STEP-UP
program began seven
years ago.
What do you tell these student
teachers who
come to your house?
TONY VELAZCO, Host Dad: Not to
have the savior
mentality.
They're not coming in here to
save people.
They're here to be part of the
community.
And they really have to get to
know where
the kids are coming from in
order to be able
to teach them better, to reach
them, to inspire
them.
LISA STARK: Finding host
families and local
schools is done with the support
of community
groups, such as the one run by
Carlos Nelson
in Auburn Gresham.
CARLOS NELSON, Greater
Auburn-Gresham Development
Corporation: The teachers in our
schools have
daunting tasks.
And it's way beyond just being
able to teach
kids math and reading.
But they're also having to deal
with social,
emotional challenges, kids that
haven't had
a full night's sleep, that
haven't had a full
meal.
And that's why we need to
prepare educators
to be more in tune with teaching
the kids
in our South Side community.
LISA STARK: The hope with a
program like this
one is that, if teachers are
truly trained
to teach in urban schools, not
only will they
take jobs here, but they will
stay.
VANESSA PUENTES HERNANDEZ,
Assistant Principal,
Farragut Career Academy: Hey,
guys, what's
up?
LISA STARK: Assistant Principal
Vanessa Puentes
Hernandez, who has worked in the
district
for a decade, has seen teachers
come and go.
Turnover in some Chicago schools
is as high
as 50 percent over four years.
VANESSA PUENTES HERNANDEZ: It
takes a village.
It really does.
And so it's important to learn
about the community
that you work in, because you
want to be invested
in that, not as an outsider
coming in and
maybe gaining some experience
and leaving,
but as someone who truly wants
to create change.
WOMAN: That's a lot of work.
That's a sacrifice.
WOMAN: It really is.
VANESSA PUENTES HERNANDEZ: They
care so much
about their community.
It's kind of sad to see like how
much effort
they're kind of putting in, and
they still
get seen in such negative
lighting.
LISA STARK: Most of STEP-UP's
graduates end
up in Chicago or other high-need
schools.
And over 80 percent are still in
the classroom
after five years.
ASIA-ANA WILLIAMS: We all came
from so many
different backgrounds, but I
think that the
common ground was always that we
all wanted
to be good teachers.
These schools deserve good
teachers, just
like any other school district.
LISA STARK: And you want to be
one of them?
ASIA-ANA WILLIAMS: And I want to
be one of
them.
And I am going to be one of
LISA STARK: And with the help of
this program,
she's likely to have some
company.
Reporting from Chicago, I'm Lisa
Stark of
Education Week for the "PBS
NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Turning now to
politics:
How much have team Clinton and
team Trump
HARI SREENIVASAN: Turning now to
politics:
How much have team Clinton and
team Trump
invested in their on-the-ground
outreach,
their ground games, if you will,
to get their
supporters out to the polls this
fall?
Correspondent Lisa Desjardins
and digital
politics editor Daniel Bush
tackle that in
their new piece out today on our
"NewsHour"
Web site.
And Lisa joins me now.
So, you went out to different
campaign facilities,
offices out in these key states.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What's the
difference when
you go into them?
LISA DESJARDINS: This is an
important difference,
because now we're in the crucial
last two
months of this campaign.
The map, I think, tells the
story the best.
And this wasn't easy to
pinpoint.
But let's look at the Trump
campaign offices.
He right now has 88 offices in
key battleground
states, the states that pretty
much will decide
this election.
Look at those circles.
They indicate how many offices
are in that
state.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, the bigger
the circle,
the more offices, yes?
LISA DESJARDINS: Exactly.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK.
LISA DESJARDINS: Now let's look
at the Clinton
map.
You see a very stark difference
there.
Clinton has more than three
times as many
offices as Donald Trump right
now going into
Labor Day, the traditional start
of the presidential
campaign season.
Now, one thing I have to note,
the Donald
Trump campaign says more coming.
They say about over 100 are
going to come
online in the next week, but
they're not open
now.
And this is especially a problem
for them
in some key states.
Let's look at four key states
where we know
things could be decisive,
Florida, North Carolina,
Ohio, Pennsylvania.
Right now, Donald Trump has just
20 offices
in those four mega-states,
Hillary Clinton
136.
Hari, Florida, we know, has been
decisive
in the past.
It's a great example here.
Donald Trump right now just has
one office
open there.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, one of the
questions
would be, well, how important
are those offices?
What's the work that happens at
those offices?
And does it matter in this
election?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
Why should we care about the
ground game?
It seems like inside politics.
The ground game has decided at
least the last
two elections, maybe going back
farther to
even George W. Bush as well.
Traditionally, it is critical.
These are the places where
volunteers identify
and actually sway voters.
Phone banks happen there,
canvassing operations.
This is kind of the breathing
heart of usual
campaigns.
Now, it doesn't matter this
year.
The Trump campaign says, no,
that they have
an operation that defies
convention, that
they like that, they don't need
as many on-the-ground
offices.
They say, instead, their
groundswell of support
is a different type of campaign,
and they
think that this traditional type
of tactic
is something they don't need as
much as other
campaigns.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And they're
also saying
they're going mobile.
They have got some R.V.s,
instead of fixed
locations.
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes.
That's right.
We know the Trump campaign has
had a resource
problem up until now.
They have now started raising
money, but haven't
had funds until now.
One way they have been dealing
with this is
they have launched mobile R.V.s
in the state
of Florida.
They said they have one office
there, but
they have got three R.V.s
cruising around
the state.
And they say what they want to
do is reach
out to voters.
Even if they don't have these
canvassing and
phone bank operations to the
extent that Clinton
does, they say they want to go
to grocery
stores and register voters.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Are they
trying to reinvent
this process?
LISA DESJARDINS: They say they
are, but I
think it remains to be seen on
whether they
do that or not.
As I say, they haven't had a lot
of resources
until now.
They have just had a good
fund-raising month
in the last month.
We have to see how they spend
those resources.
And the data game really is what
reinvented
things with team Obama.
Right?
So, we have see if the Trump
campaign, do
they use digital, or do they --
how do they
get this groundswell of support
to show up
at the polls?
It's especially a concern not
just for Trump,
Clinton, but for down-ballot
races.
These campaign offices are the
heartbeat of
pumping out voters not just for
Donald Trump,
but for every Republican on the
ballot.
So it's something the entire
party is watching.
HARI SREENIVASAN: With all of
this, even with
the lopsided 3-1
advantage-disadvantage, Trump
supporters are going to say,
he's been pretty
successful so far, he's our guy,
and he didn't
do anything by the book going
into this.
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes, and may be
right.
He's put relatively few
resources, not that
much work into these states, and
he's not
that far behind in a lot of the
key states,
in fact, tied in places like
Nevada, just
behind by four or five points,
closing the
gap in some other states like
Michigan, without
having to do too much.
The danger for Donald Trump is,
should he
come close to Election Day and
have sort of
a wobble on the campaign trail,
have a moment
where voters are in doubt, he
doesn't have
this campaign infrastructure to
fall back
on.
So it's a bit of a gamble, but
the Trump campaign
says, hey, we like how we're
doing without
all this spending.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, you
can read
the full report online at
NewsHour.org by
Lisa and Dan.
Lisa, thanks for joining us.
LISA DESJARDINS: My pleasure.
GWEN IFILL: The tourist season
in Europe is
winding down, and at least one
nation hopes
it will stay that way.
Iceland was one of this year's
it destinations
for vacationers, but people
there are learning
the downside of that boom.
More tourist money can also mean
more problems.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant has
our story.
MALCOLM BRABANT: With its
volcanic underbelly
and unspoiled prehistoric
landscape, Iceland
has suddenly become one of the
hottest destinations.
OLOF YRR ATLADOTTIR, Director
General, Icelandic
Tourist Board: My name is Olof
Yrr Atladottir.
And I'm the director general of
the Icelandic
Tourist Board.
For me, Iceland is the
possibility of enjoying
solitude in spectacular
wide-open spaces.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Iceland is
certainly spectacular.
The Gullfoss Waterfall, part of
the so-called
Golden Circle of attractions not
far from
the capital, is said by some to
rival Niagara
Falls.
And it's not surrounded by
high-rise hotels.
But can you get solitude?
That's debatable.
Iceland is a location for "Game
of Thrones."
And fans of the hit series are
partly responsible
for the island's new popularity,
so much so,
that it's difficult to grab a
shot of pure
nature without getting
photo-bombed by people
taking selfies.
MARK HEASMAN, Charity Director:
My name is
Mark Heasman.
I run a children's charity in
London.
It's a delightful country.
So far, we have been in
Reykjavik.
But we're now just about to go
out on a three-week
expedition around the interior,
so we can't
wait to get away from the
people.
MALCOLM BRABANT: We met Heasman
in the Thingvellir
National Park, another
destination on the
Golden Circle route.
It's a World Heritage Site and
place of great
national importance to
Icelanders as a legendary
meeting point throughout the
centuries.
MARK HEASMAN: This particular
point seems
really crowded, actually, for
somewhere that's
so special and so unique.
It's actually a bit
disappointing to see it
full of tourists.
But then people need to see it,
I guess.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Fishing used to
be Iceland's
most important industry.
But it's now been overtaken by
tourism, which
accounts for a third of all of
the country's
foreign currency earnings.
Since 2010, there's been between
a 25 percent
to 30 percent increase in the
number of visitors
each year.
And so, this year, 2016, looks
like being
a record season, with government
agencies
predicting 1.8 million arrivals.
IAN SYKES, Resident of Iceland:
My name is
Ian Sykes.
I'm a retired lecturer in
hospitality and
tourism from Scotland.
And I now live in Iceland just
outside Reykjavik
with my wife.
And I run a guest house here.
I believe Iceland really needs
to get a grip
of tourism.
Get a hold of it.
And if it really hurts,
actually, it might
hurt.
Just control the numbers and get
everything
sorted.
At the moment, it's just more
and more tourists
and money in the till, without a
real thought
to the future.
OLOF YRR ATLADOTTIR: I think
that the growth
has been very rapid.
And it is very challenging to
meet such a
rapid growth.
And, yes, we have had growing
pains, yes.
However, Iceland is still full
of spots where
you can still enjoy the
solitude.
There are a few places that
become like other
most popular tourism
destinations, like the
Eiffel Tower in Paris or these
hot spots.
They tend to become crowded in
Iceland, as
in other places.
But Iceland still provides the
possibility
for a very singular experience.
GUNNAR THOR JOHANNESSON,
University of Iceland:
My name is Gunnar Thor
Johannesson.
I'm a professor in geography and
tourism at
the University of Iceland,
Reykjavik.
My specialty is tourism
development, tourism
policy and planning, and
destination development.
We need to invest, like, in soft
things like
knowledge.
We need to invest in education
and training.
We need to invest in -- also in
concrete and
steel.
We need to invest -- like, in
the road system.
We know that some of the more
serious challenges
that tourism is facing is that
simply that
some of the infrastructure in
some of the
hot spots of tourism is not
strong enough.
IAN SYKES: The radical kind of
answer would
be to put a ceiling on the
number of people
that come, until we're really
quite happy
that we have the infrastructure
to cope, because,
at the moment, people are coming
on short
three-day holidays, enjoy
Iceland, but are
going away saying fantastic
country, but it's
expensive, and there are no
toilets, and it's
all crowded.
OLOF YRR ATLADOTTIR: I actually
don't think
that's very possible, because
that it would
mean putting a cap on private
enterprise in
a way, in a very strange sort of
way.
And I don't think that I would
believe in
that.
But I do think that we can both
organize and
plan certain destinations within
Iceland.
And, of course, if we look
towards the industry,
which is a very wide industry,
has very, very
many aspects, and I think that
in a way we
can maybe organize the tourism
so it grows,
as I say, more harmoniously.
HALLDOR MAR, Resident of
Iceland: My name
is Halldor Mar.
I'm a graphic design student.
And I'm about to get booted out
of my home
because of Airbnb.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The shortage of
hotels and
guest houses in Iceland has led
to an explosion
of residents renting out their
homes to tourists
using the Airbnb Web site.
Halldor Mar doesn't believe that
new legislation
tightening the rules on Airbnb
rentals will
help potential tenants.
He claims that future rent may
account for
70 percent of his earnings,
which tempers
his enthusiasm for the tourist
influx.
HALLDOR MAR: They're taking away
our homes,
you know?
It's good that they're coming.
But it's not really their fault.
I don't think they're aware of
the problem.
But the landlords, just
everybody here wants
to make money and get into the
market, tourism
market.
And that's the problem.
ASHILDUR BRAGADOTTI, Director,
Reykjavik:
Hi.
My name is Ashildur Bragadotti.
And I'm the director of Visit
Reykjavik.
We are not facing any problems,
in my opinion.
But, of course, we have to be
concerned because
the growth has been so much,
more than anyone
could have expected.
And there are some challenges
that we're facing
because of that.
It takes, like, two to three
years to build
a hotel.
Therefore, Airbnb has become
more common in
Reykjavik, and that's something
that -- a
question that we're facing now.
Are there too many citizens
lending out their
houses?
GUNNAR THOR JOHANNESSON: I think
it's also
positive not to ban Airbnb
altogether.
Now we have a limit.
So, it's a 90-day period that
you are able
to rent out, or a certain amount
of income
that you're able to have before
you have to
apply for a license.
And this means that actually
normal people
are able actually to take part
in this boom,
this tourism boom.
HALLDOR MAR: This country is not
for Icelanders
anymore.
It's more for tourists.
I'm looking at maybe we just
have to move
abroad.
And this is going to be a
tourists' country,
rather than Iceland.
Let's call it tourist land,
rather than Iceland,
from now on, I guess.
IAN SYKES: The tourism will drop
off within
the next three years.
The numbers will stabilize.
I don't think they're going to
reach the numbers
they think.
And then there's going to be a
kind of oversupply,
and people are going to kind of
start to go
bankrupt, basically, because
they're going
to be cut-pricing each other.
STEPHEN GILLES, Tourist: My name
is Stephen
Gilles.
I'm a student at the
Massachusetts Maritime
Academy and also a world
traveler.
What moves me about Iceland is
that there's
such little pollution, unlike a
lot of the
other places that I have been in
the world.
I just came from Dubai, and we
went into the
middle of the desert.
And I was still finding
pollution, plastic,
rubbish.
And you come here, and you go to
the middle
of nowhere, and you won't find
that.
It's unspoiled.
It's surreal.
MALCOLM BRABANT: And in Northern
Iceland,
this whale-watching trip
delivered what it
promised, the majestic and rare
sight of normally
solitary humpbacks feeding in
pairs.
Despite the downside of high
prices and crowds,
the island is unforgettable.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Iceland.
HARI SREENIVASAN: If you are
planning to travel
to Iceland or some other
destination, you
might want to take a tip from
novelist and
poet Russell Banks.
In the age of social media,
selfies and even
selfie sticks, he considers the
differences
between a traveler and a
tourist.
RUSSELL BANKS, Novelist: One way
to distinguish
a tourist from a traveler is
that a tourist
carries a camera or a phone and
takes pictures
with one or both.
A traveler carries no camera and
uses his
or her phone mainly to make
occasional phone
calls home or when lost for the
GPS.
I used to carry a camera when I
traveled,
but almost never took any
pictures with it,
and apologized when I returned
home, until
I realized that my reluctance to
point and
click was really a reluctance to
line up and
edit and frame whatever I was
seeing or hearing
or smelling.
The fall of the morning sunlight
against the
glittering sea.
The crinkled face of an old
woman selling
spices in the market.
It was, I believe, an
instinctive reluctance
to remove myself from my
experience, an experience
that could only occur far from
home and habit,
where the rules as much as the
landscape were
unfamiliar.
To photograph it was somehow to
reduce and
domesticate my experience and
ultimately to
kill it.
I knew this, but still felt
somehow apologetic
for not having brought back a
photographic
record of the death of my
experience.
Then, some time in the early
1980s, I was
invited by a few magazines and
journals to
take a trip anywhere you like,
the Seychelles
in the middle of the Indian
Ocean, Alaska,
the Andes, and write about it
and get paid
for it, travel writing.
The photography will be taken
care of by a
professional.
I could leave my camera at home,
and did.
Instead, I brought a notebook.
And every night before sleeping,
I spent a
half-hour and sometimes more
remembering and
recapitulating my day, even when
nothing happened,
when I met no one of interest or
went nowhere
beyond the veranda outside my
bedroom, and
merely read the local newspaper
and chatted
briefly with the housekeeper,
because there
was always something happening
in my head.
When we are dislocated, not
relocated, we
think new thoughts, deal with
unbidden strange
emotions, reflect on our past in
a freshened
way, from a new perspective.
We remember and are surprisingly
saddened
by a brief liaison or flirtation
we have not
thought about in decades.
We decide to reread that
1,000-page novel
our smartest friends insist is a
work of genius,
but somehow we didn't get it the
first time
around and gave up 50 pages in.
It's now more than 30 years that
I have traveled
without a camera and snapped no
pictures with
my iPhone, and I never apologize
for it.
Instead, when I travel, every
night in a hotel
room or a cabin or a tent, I sit
down and
write, sometimes by candlelight,
an account
of my day, whether I'm writing
for hire or
just traveling on my own.
My notes have the effect of
organizing my
attention for the next day,
making me a sharper
observer, a more careful
listener, a more
thoughtful guest.
I don't do it to show to anyone
else or so
I can reread my notes months or
years later
and remember the joys and pains
of that particular
journey.
No need.
The simple act of writing it
down in the first
place imprints the journey in my
conscious
memory, stores it there, like a
buried treasure.
It's my private treasure, and
only I possess
the map.
GWEN IFILL: And we will be back
in a moment.
But, first, take this time to
hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: On
the "NewsHour" online right now:
Our public
media partners at KCTS in
Seattle introduce
the "NewsHour" online right now:
Our public
media partners at KCTS in
Seattle introduce
us to
a transgender musician who gave
up
a very important aspect of his
art
a transgender musician who gave
up
a very important aspect of his
art
to embrace his gender identity.
Find that on Art Beat and much
more on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Find that on Art Beat and much
more on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight.
On Wednesday, we explore a
program that turns college
students into inventors.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all
of
us
here at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and
good night.
here at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and
good night.